Text2Story Annotation ManualMay 2024Preface This manual describes the process of developing a multilayer semantic annotation scheme designed for extracting information from a European Portuguese corpus of news articles, at four levels, temporal, referential, spatial and semantic role labelling. The framework was developed within the projects Text2Story Extracting journalistic narratives from text and representing them in a narrative modeling language, with reference PTDC/CCI-COM/31857/2017 (NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-03185) and StorySense: Uncovering deeper layers of Narrative Understanding, with reference 2022.09312.PTDC (DOI 10.54499/2022.09312.PTDC).The proposed scheme harmonizes parts 1, 4, 7 and 9 of ISO 24617 Language resource management - Semantic annotation framework. This annotation framework includes a set of entity structures (participants, events, times, spatial relations and measures) and of links (temporal, aspectual, subordination, objectal, spatial, and semantic roles) with several tags and attribute values.SourcesISO24617-1:2012, Language resource management-Semantic annotation framework (SemAF) - Part 1: Time and events (SemAF-Time, ISO-TimeML) ISO-24617-4: 2014, Language resource management- Semantic annotation framework (SemAF) - Part 4: Semantic roles (SemAF-SR)ISO 24617-9: 2019, Language resource management-Semantic annotation framework (SemAF) - Part 9: Reference annotation framework (RAF)ISO 24617-7: 2020 (second edition), Language resource management - Semantic annotation framework (SemAF) - Part 7: Spatial informationI. Multilayer semantic annotation framework II. Stages of the annotation process1st stageAnnotation of eventsAnnotation of timesAnnotation of temporal, aspectual and subordination links2nd stageAnnotation of participantsAnnotation of objectal relations3rd stageAnnotation of semantic role links4th stageAnnotation of spatial relations and measuresAnnotation of spatial and measure linksIII. Annotation guidelinesA. Entity structuresA.1. EventDefinition- eventuality that happens or occurs or state or circumstance that is temporally relevant, i.e., that is directly related to a temporal expression or change over the course of the text.Tag span- verb forms (only main verbs, not auxiliary verbs). Ex. O polícia prendeu o ladrão. O João tem visitado a tia.Notes: * in the case of aspectual verbs, they should be marked and linked to the main verb by an aspectual link.* in case of a predicative construction, we leave the copular verb and mark the adjective/ noun/ prepositional complement, identifying the POS as an adjective or noun, but assigning the values of the tags TENSE, and ASPECT according to the information from the verb. Ex. A polícia estava pronta.If the copula verb is followed by a prepositional or adverbial phrase with an interpretation of spatial or temporal location, mark only the verb. Ex. O João está ali. O João ficou em Lisboa.* if the verb is included in a (semi) lexicalized expression, mark that expression as the predicator. Ex. O suspeito será presente a tribunal.* in those cases of combinations of verb ir + V-infinitive, consider the following two scenarios:o  the 2 verbs are in adjacency: consider only the main verb. Ex. foi pedir satisfações a casa do vizinho.o the 2 verbs are not in adjacency: consider 2 autonomous markables. Ex. foi a casa do vizinho pedir satisfações)- nouns without specifiers, complements and modifiers. Ex. O ataque à cidade ocorreu às 12.00. Notes:* in the case of polysemous nominalizations when they do not convey an interpretation of event, they are not marked. Ex. O relato da testemunha refere que o médico agiu de forma errada. In this case, the meaning of “relato” that is relevant is content.* in the case of nouns that represent events and are followed by adjectival modifiers, or are followed by an adjective and form a (semi)lexicalized expression, mark the whole expression. Ex. fiscalização rodoviária, prisão efetiva.* nouns in prepositional phrases: in PPs only mark the noun phrase head, that is, the noun. Ex. O Prof. Silva, em sabática na universidade do Porto, fez uma descoberta importante.- adjectives without complements and modifiers Ex. O vulcão Kilauea, dormente até ontem, começou a expelir lava.Attributes- class: o OCCURRENCE – a situation that happens or occurs. Ex. O polícia prendeu o ladrão.o STATE – a situation in which something obtains or holds true, and that is temporally relevant, that is, * a state that changes over the text, or* related to temporal expressions, or* a state that is introduced by I-action, I-state or reporting class, or * predicative states that are still valid taking into consideration the document creation time.Ex. A vítima estava sozinha em casa.o REPORTING – an action of a person/ organization declaring something, narrating a situation, informing about a situation,…Ex. declarar, dizer, explicar, relatarteo PERCEPTION – a situation involving physical perception of another situation. Ex. ver, ouviro ASPECTUAL – A situation that focuses on a different part of another situation. Ex. começar, continuar, terminar,…o I-ACTION (Intensional action) – an event that introduces another event as argument in an intensional context. Ex. tentar, adiar, evitar, cancelar, pedir, ordenar, autorizar, prometer, oferecer, propor, decidir, concordar, nomear, sugerir, alegaro I-STATE (Intensional state) – a state that introduces events as argument in an intensional context. Ex. acreditar, pensar, imaginar, querer, esperar, odiar, preocupar-se, exigir, estar preparado/ pronto/ ansioso- type:o STATE – a situation in which something obtains or holds true. Ex. A vítima estava presa.o PROCESS – a situation that is dynamic and atelic, with duration. Ex. O João nadou.o TRANSITION – a situation that is dynamic, with duration and consequent state. It subsumes accomplishments and achievements. Ex. O João leu um livro./ O João ganhou a corrida.- pos:o VERBo NOUNo ADJECTIVEo PREPOSITION- tense:o PRESENT – locates a situation at the present time, or in a time interval that starts in the past and still holds in the present. It can also depict habitual situations in the present.  o PAST – locates situations in a past time. o FUTURE – locates situations in the future. o IMPERFECT – locates an ongoing situation in the past.- aspect:o PROGRESSIVE – ongoing or continuous situation. Ex. O soldado estava a sorrir.o PERFECTIVE – situation that ended. Ex. O polícia prendeu o assaltante.o IMPERFECTIVE – ongoing, habitual, or repeated situation in the past. Ex. O homem procurava uma saída do banco.o PERFECTIVE-PROGRESSIVE – combination of the meanings of progressive and perfective. Ex. O João esteve a ler um livro.o IMPERFECTIVE-PROGRESSIVE – combination of the meanings of progressive and imperfective. Ex. O João estava a ler um livro quando a Maria entrou.o NONE – no aspectual value for non-verbal event-denoting expressions (nouns, adjectives)- vform:o NONE- when the verb form is finite, or when it does not apply (noun, adjective)o GERUNDIVEo INFINITIVEo PARTICIPLE - mood:o NONE – verb forms in the Indicative or no mood value. Ex. O João comprou um carro.o SUBJUNCTIVE – it signals the subjunctive mood. Ex. O João pediu que vás ao mercado.o CONDITIONAL - it signals the conditional mood. Ex. O João viajaria se pudesse.o FUTURE - it signals the future mood. Ex. O João já estará em casa agora. o IMPERATIVE - it signals the imperative mood. Ex. Traz-me um copo de água!- modality – attributes values of epistemic and deontic modality to situations represented by the following modal verbs:o DEVERo PODERo TER DEo SER CAPAZ DEo NONE- polarity: o NEGo POS- movement1: o MOTION_LITERAL: the participant changes her/his physical location during the course of the event (throughout a time interval). Ex. O rapaz subiu até ao topo da colina.o MOTION_FICTIVE: the eventuality describes a spatial property of a participant (no change throughout a time interval - neither in its location, nor in its spatial properties). Ex. A montanha eleva-se acima do vale.o MOTION_INTRINSIC-CHANGE: the eventuality describes a change in an intrinsic spatial characteristic of the participant) (height, width, length or shape). Ex. O rio subiu acima do dique.o NON_MOTION (non-movement verbs)A.3. TimesDefinition- Temporal expressions that represent time units classification: t<day (duas horas, manhã,…), t=day (quarta-feira, 2 de janeiro, dia de Natal), dia<t<year (mês, semestre, Janeiro, verão,…), t=year (2021, próximo ano), t>year (século passado)Tag span- noun phrase (o verão passado, tarde, …). Notes: * whenever the temporal expression is preceded by a preposition, it will not be part of the tag.*  whenever there is a clausal modifier after the temporal clause, the tag will only include the temporal expression (ex. cinco dias depois de ter saído: <time>cinco dias <event> ter saído - adverbial phrase (ontem, recentemente,..)    Notes: * two temporal expressions in a specification relation if (i) they belong to the same class, that is, the same time unit type (terça-feira, dia 21), and (ii) they belong to the same syntactic constituent. * two temporal expressions in an anchoring relation only if denoting daytime (dez minutos para as 15 horas). But expressions like duas semanas a partir da próxima semana should be marked up with tags <time>duas semanas<time>próxima semana and a temporal link is established between them.* two temporal expressions in a conjunction/ disjunction relation are always marked with two different tags. Ex. seis meses ou um ano      Non-markables* Prepositions and subordinating conjunctions (quando, enquanto, durante)* Sequencing and ordering expressions (entretanto, antes)* Expressions of non-quantifiable duration (permanentemente, temporariamente)* References to non-existent times (nenhum data, nenhum tempo)* Time when it means eventuality or occasion (Este tempo é complicado)* Temporal expressions used as proper names (25 de Abril)* Bare frequency (uma vez, frequente, raramente, nunca, usualmente)Attributes- type:o DATE – calendar time (ontem, 21 de março, o verão de 2000)o TIME – time of the day (cinco horas, a manhã de 21 de março, ontem à noite)o DURATION – duration (dois meses, 3 horas, toda a noite)o SET – set of times (duas vezes por semana, cada dois dias)- value: it specifies the value according to the type. It must be written in the notebox. Ex. 4 p.m. value=T16:00; durante dois meses value=P2MNote: Use freq and quant to specify sets. Ex. Duas vezes por semana value=P1W freq=2X; diariamente value=1D quant=EVERY- FunctonInDocument: indicates the function of a time expression in providing a temporal anchor for other temporal expressions in the document.o PUBLICATION_TIME – the time the text is published.- anchortime: it specifies the time that serves as reference point. Ex. O ladrão assaltou o banco no dia 23 de março. Nesse dia, agrediu ainda uma funcionária de um café. (o dia 23 must be marked as the AnchorTime of nesse dia)A.3. Participants Definition- named entities, or participants, that play an important role in the event or state.Tag span- noun phrase (O João, o cão, o meu cão, o cão castanho, o cão que me mordeu, todos os cães) Notes: the markables correspond to full-fledged NP, which includes determinants/quantifiers, complements of the noun (in the form of adjectival or prepositional phrases), and modifiers.- pronouns (eles, estas, aquilo)B.2. Temporal linkDefinition- establishes different temporal relationships (simultaneous, after, before) between two events, two times, or between an event and a time.- Directionally:o Two events/ two temporal expressions: from the last to the previous one in the linear order of discourse.o Event + temporal expression: from event to temporal expression (irrespective of linear order).Attributes- BEFORE – a situation/ time expression occurs before another one. Ex. A polícia investigou os crimes que tinham ocorrido nos anos 90. (ocorrido – BEFORE – investigou).- AFTER – a situation/ time expression occurs after another one. Ex. Se ele partir agora, chegará a tempo. (chegará – AFTER – partir).- INCLUDES – a situation/ time expression includes another one. Ex. O João saiu quando a Maria dormia. (dormia – INCLUDES – saiu).- IS_INCLUDED – a situation/ time expression is included in another one. Ex. O João chegou ontem. (chegou – IS_INCLUDED – ontem).- DURING – a situation/ time expression occurs during another one. Ex. O João nadou durante 2 horas. (nadou – DURING – 2 horas).- SIMULTANEOUS – a situation/ time expression occurs at the same time as another one Ex. Enquanto a Maria cantava, o João tocava piano (tocava – SIMULTANEOUS – cantava).- IDENTITY – two situations/ time expressions are the same.o O João conduziu até Boston. Durante a sua viagem ele comeu um donut.o Causative constructions: triggered by verbs like causar, induzir, produzir, conduzir. Ex. A chuva causou a inundação. chuva/causou-IDENTITY; causou/inundação-AFTER.o Light verb constructions: dar um passeio – IDENTITYo Reporting events that introduce the story being told in the news. Ex. O polícia disse que a vítima foi transportada para o hospital. O polícia adiantou que ela estava a recuperar bem dos ferimentos. (disse/ adiantou-IDENTITY).- BEGINS – a situation/ time expression begins another one. - ENDS – a situation/ time expression ends another one. - BEGUN_BY – a situation/ time expression is begun by another one. Ex. O João trabalhou na escola desde 1994. - ENDED_BY – a situation/ time expression is ended by another one. Ex. O João trabalhou na escola até 2000. 